431 Homework 5
================
Thomas E. Love
Due **2018-10-19** at noon. Version: 2018-10-10 06:09:30

# General Instructions

This homework now includes eight questions. Be sure to respond to each
question.

# Setting up Questions 1-6 - Using the Formula for Decoding Health News

Find a headline from the internet related to health or medicine that
describes the findings of a study published on January 1, 2014 or later.
Then find the study being referred to in PUBMED. Use the [formula for
updating your opinions about health news developed by Jeff
Leek](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/a-formula-for-decoding-health-news/)
that we will discuss in class, along with the abstract and full contents
of the published study to complete Questions 1-6.

## Question 1

Specify the URL where we can see the headline and news story describing
the findings of the study. Feel free to use `goo.gl`, `bit.ly` or a
related tool online to produce a shortened URL for this purpose. Specify
the reference completely, including the names of the author(s) of the
news story, and its full title, and source.

## Question 2

Specify a URL where we can see at least the abstract of the complete
study. Again, shortened URLs are fine. Give the complete reference to
the study, as well, including the authors, full title, journal name and
so forth.

## Question 3

Describe, in a few sentences, your original opinion (gut feeling)
related to the conclusions of the study as summarized in the headline
and news article, first in terms of a probability statement, and then
calculate the appropriate odds, remembering to convert statements about
probabilities to statements about odds. Provide some motivation for your
internal prior probability, describing your relevant personal
experiences or other factors that drove your gut feeling.

Remember, if X is an event, and Pr(X) is the probability that X occurs,
and odds(X) are the odds that X occurs, then Pr(X) = odds(X) / (1 +
odds(X)) and odds(X) = Pr(X) / (1 - Pr(X)).

## Question 4

Evaluate the study in terms of the six specifications [proposed by
Leek](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/a-formula-for-decoding-health-news/)
when evaluating study support. Be sure to specify your conclusion about
**each** of the six specifications, and provide direct quotes and
summarize the evidence from the abstract or paper to address the issues
raised and justify your conclusions.

## Question 5

Incorporate the study support assessment into a Bayes’ Rule calculation
to obtain the final odds you should now be willing to give to the
headline, and specify this value in terms of a probability statement, as
well.

## Question 6

React to the final conclusion specified by this approach in a sentence
or two. How does your subjective posterior probability that the headline
is true match up with the formula’s conclusions? Do you feel that the
formulaic approach has yielded an appropriate conclusion for you in this
case? Why or why not?

# Setting up Questions 7 and 8 - Specifying a Two-Sample Study Design

Questions 7 and 8 will ask you to respond (in complete sentences) to
several sub-items for the studies described below.

  - \[A\] What is the outcome under study?
  - \[B\] What are the (in this case, two) treatment/exposure groups?
  - \[C\] Were the data collected using matched / paired samples or
    independent samples?
  - \[D\] Are the data a random sample from the population(s) of
    interest? Or is there at least a reasonable argument for
    generalizing from the sample to the population(s)?
  - \[E\] What is the significance level (or, the confidence level) we
    require here?
  - \[F\] Are we doing one-tailed or two-tailed testing/confidence
    interval generation?
  - \[G\] If we have paired samples, did pairing help (to reduce
    nuisance variation)?
  - \[H\] If we have paired samples, what does the distribution of
    sample paired differences tell us about which inferential procedure
    to use?
  - \[I\] If we have independent samples, what does the distribution of
    each individual sample tell us about which inferential procedure to
    use?

We’ll note here that you **might** need to include the `bootdif`
function that Dr. Love created as a part of your R Markdown file in
order to complete your work on these questions. On the other hand, maybe
you won’t actually need it.

## Question 7

For 10 adults with diabetes treated with a special diet, the fasting
blood sugar values (in mg/dl) before and after treatment were gathered,
as shown below.

| Person | A   | B   | C   | D   | E   | F   | G   | H   | I   | J   |
| ------ | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Before | 340 | 335 | 220 | 285 | 320 | 230 | 190 | 210 | 295 | 270 |
| After  | 290 | 315 | 250 | 280 | 311 | 213 | 200 | 208 | 279 | 258 |

In question 7,

  - Describe the entire study using the standard questions above for
    describing the study design when comparing two samples. You should
    be responding here to Parts A-F and also either G-H *or* I,
    whichever is appropriate.
  - As Part J for Question 7, determine whether a statistically
    significant (\(\alpha\) = .05) change occurred after treatment.
    Include in your response evidence supporting any assumptions you
    make, and an appropriate confidence interval estimate.

## Question 8

One of the problems in the study of SIDS is the lack of a good animal
model. Baak and Huber (1974) studied the guinea pig as a possible model
observing the effect of lethal histamines shock on the guinea pig
thymus. The purpose was to determine if changes in the thymus of the
guinea pig correspond to pathological changes observed in SIDS victims.
In the experiment, 40 animals (20 male, 20 female) were randomly
assigned either to “control” or to “histamine shock.” The data are
gathered in the table below. Note that we will ignore the sex
information in this
Assignment.

|    Sex |                  Control                  |              Histamine Shock               |
| -----: | :---------------------------------------: | :----------------------------------------: |
| Female | `6.4 6.2 6.9 6.9 5.4 7.5 6.1 7.3 5.9 6.8` | `8.4 10.2 6.2 5.4 5.5 7.3 5.2 5.1 5.7 9.8` |
|   Male | `4.3 7.5 5.2 4.9 5.7 4.3 6.4 6.2 5.0 5.0` | `7.5 6.7 5.7 4.9 6.8 6.6 6.9 11.8 6.7 9.0` |

In question 8,

  - Describe the entire study using the standard questions above for
    describing the study design when comparing two samples. Again, you
    should be responding here to Parts A-F and also either G-H *or* I,
    whichever is appropriate.
  - As part J for Question 8, on the basis of the most appropriate 95%
    confidence interval, ignoring possible sex differences, can you
    conclude that the tabulated variable \[medullary blood vessel
    surface (in mm^2 / mm^3)\] differs significantly between “control”
    and “histamine shock?” Justify the assumptions behind your choice of
    inference.

## Grading

Questions 1-6 (as a group) are worth 40 points, questions 7-8 (as a
group) are worth 60 points.

A complete rubric will be made available when grades are posted.
