431 Homework 7
================
Thomas E. Love
Due **2018-11-16** at noon. Version: 2018-10-25 23:37:21

# General Instructions

This homework includes **nine** questions. Be sure to respond to each
question.

## Hint

You may want to make use of the `Love-boost.R` script on [our Data and
Code page](https://github.com/THOMASELOVE/431-2018-data).

## Setup for Questions 1-5

A study of the effects of carbon monoxide exposure on men with coronary
artery disease subjected the patients to several exercise tests. The men
involved in the study were recruited from three different medical
centers. Before combining the subjects into one large group to conduct
the analysis, we need to first examine whether baseline characteristics
of the subjects from the three medical centers (21 from Johns Hopkins
University, 16 from Rancho Los Amigos, and 23 from St. Louis University)
are comparable. Here, we examine pulmonary function at the start of the
study, and we’ve pre-planned pairwise comparisons across all
combinations of the three centers. For each of the 60 subjects, we have
a measure of forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV<sub>1</sub>, in
liters) stored in the `coexpose1.csv` and the `coexpose2.csv` files on
[our Data and Code page](https://github.com/THOMASELOVE/431-2018-data).

This data set is built from an example in Chapters 11 and 12 of Pagano
and Gauvreau. The data source is Allred EN et al. Acute effects of
carbon monoxide exposure on individuals with coronary artery disease.
Health Effects Institute Research Report Number 25, November 1989.

# Question 1

The same data appear in the `coexpose1.csv` and the `coexpose2.csv`
files. What is the difference between the two files, and which of the
two files is more useful for fitting an ANOVA to compare the
FEV<sub>1</sub> means across the three medical centers?

# Question 2

Produce a numerical summary to compare the means across the three
centers, and specify the rank order (highest to lowest) of the sampled
FEV<sub>1</sub> levels.

# Question 3

Produce a graphical summary to compare the three centers that allows you
to assess the Normality and Equal Variances assumptions of an ANOVA to
compare the FEV<sub>1</sub> means across the three medical centers. What
conclusion do you draw about the assumptions in this setting? Then do
the actual comparison of the FEV<sub>1</sub> means of the three
different medical centers using an analysis of variance. What conclusion
do you draw, using a **90%** confidence level?

# Question 4

Specify the linear model regression equation used to predict our
FEV<sub>1</sub> outcome on the basis of medical center. What fraction of
the variation in FEV<sub>1</sub> levels is explained by the medical
center?

# Question 5

This is a pre-planned comparison, but the sample sizes differ across the
groups being compared. Obtain the results from a Tukey HSD method and
then a Bonferroni approach for pairwise comparisons of the population
FEV<sub>1</sub> means, in each case again using a 90% confidence level.
Do your conclusions differ?

## Hint for Question 5

Note that the `TukeyHSD` function takes a `conf.level` argument to
specify something other than the default 0.95. So, in fact, does the
Bonferroni approach using `pairwise.t.test`, although it’s not actually
necessary there, since that method only produces *p* values, not
confidence intervals.

# Question 6

Find an example of a visualization designed to support a comparison of
at least two population means or medians using either paired or
independent samples in a published work (online or not) for which you
can find the complete sourcing information, and which was built no
earlier than January 1, 2013.

Provide the complete reference and a copy of the image itself (including
any captions or titles) and surrounding material for the visualization.

# Question 7

In a few sentences, describe the purpose of the comparison being made in
your example from Question 6. Explain its context and why it is
important. Specify the research question that this comparison (and the
accompanying p value or confidence interval based inference, if
available) is providing to the reader.

# Question 8

In a few sentences, describe the visualization that you found which
relates to the comparison being made in your example from Question 6.
Explain what you believe the visualization is trying to do. Specify why
it is or is not effective, in your view.

# Question 9

Provide your best suggestion as to how either the visualization or the
comparison that you found in Question 6 might be improved, and explain
why your change (or changes) would be an improvement.

## Grading

  - Questions 1, 2 and 4 are each worth 10 points.
  - Questions 3 and 5 are worth 15 points each.
  - Questions 6-9 are worth 10 points each.

A complete rubric will be made available when grades are posted.
