431 Homework 6
================
Thomas E. Love
Due **2018-10-26** at noon. Version: 2018-09-23 23:29:30

# General Instructions

This homework includes nine questions. Be sure to respond to each
question.

## Hint

We expect you to make use of the `twobytwo` function, from the
`Love-boost.R` script on [our Data and Code
page](https://github.com/THOMASELOVE/431-2018-data). You should include
that function as part of your Markdown file.

# Question 1 - The Signal and The Noise

Silver writes (in several places prior to Chapter 12, but especially
there) that the goal of any predictive model is to capture as much
signal as possible and as little noise as possible. What does this mean
to you in your scientific and other endeavours, going forward? Give a
specific example. An answer of 150 - 250 words is what we’re looking
for.

# Question 2

Suppose you plan to study whether surgery can prolong life among men
suffering from prostate cancer, which typically develops and spreads
very slowly. Men diagnosed with prostate cancer will be randomly
assigned to either undergo surgery or not. Suppose you believe that
approximately 10% of men diagnosed with prostate cancer but do not have
surgery will eventually die from prostate cancer, and you want to do the
study using a sample size that will retain at least 80% power to detect
a drop down to 5%, using a two-sided approach with a 95% confidence
level.

What is the smallest number of men (including both the surgery and
non-surgery groups) that you will need to enroll in this new study to
meet these specifications, using a balanced design? Provide the details
of your calculation, and also provide a complete sentence or two
interpreting the meaning of the results in context.

# Question 3

In 2003, the *New England Journal of Medicine* published the results of
a Scandinavian study of the issue described in Question 2. In [that
report](http://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa012794), among 347 men
randomly assigned to surgery, 16 eventually died of prostate cancer,
compared with 31 of the 348 men who did not have surgery.

With 95% confidence, can you conclude that the odds of death due to
prostate cancer is significantly greater for those who did NOT have
surgery than it is for those who did have surgery? Provide appropriate
details of your calculations, including a sentence or two interpreting
the meaning of the results in context.

# Question 4

In a 2014 [follow-up
report](http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1311593#t=article)
describing results at the end of 2012, a total of 63 men assigned to
surgery and 99 men not assigned to surgery had died of prostate cancer.
In a sentence or two, explain how an analysis of these new results
compares to the conclusions you drew in Question 3.

## Setup for Questions 5-9

A study of the effects of carbon monoxide exposure on men with coronary
artery disease subjected the patients to several exercise tests. The men
involved in the study were recruited from three different medical
centers. Before combining the subjects into one large group to conduct
the analysis, we need to first examine whether baseline characteristics
of the subjects from the three medical centers (21 from Johns Hopkins
University, 16 from Rancho Los Amigos, and 23 from St. Louis University)
are comparable. Here, we examine pulmonary function at the start of the
study, and we’ve pre-planned pairwise comparisons across all
combinations of the three centers. For each of the 60 subjects, we have
a measure of forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV<sub>1</sub>, in
liters) stored in the `coexpose1.csv` and the `coexpose2.csv` files on
[our Data and Code page](https://github.com/THOMASELOVE/431-2018-data).

This data set is built from an example in Chapters 11 and 12 of Pagano
and Gauvreau. The data source is Allred EN et al. Acute effects of
carbon monoxide exposure on individuals with coronary artery disease.
Health Effects Institute Research Report Number 25, November 1989.

# Question 5

The same data appear in the `coexpose1.csv` and the `coexpose2.csv`
files. What is the difference between the two files, and which of the
two files is more useful for fitting an ANOVA to compare the
FEV<sub>1</sub> means across the three medical centers?

# Question 6

Produce a numerical summary to compare the means across the three
centers, and specify the rank order (highest to lowest) of the sampled
FEV<sub>1</sub> levels.

# Question 7

Produce a graphical summary to compare the three centers that allows you
to assess the Normality and Equal Variances assumptions of an ANOVA to
compare the FEV<sub>1</sub> means across the three medical centers. What
conclusion do you draw about the assumptions in this setting? Then do
the actual comparison of the FEV<sub>1</sub> means of the three
different medical centers using an analysis of variance. What conclusion
do you draw, using a **90%** confidence level?

# Question 8

Specify the linear model regression equation used to predict our
FEV<sub>1</sub> outcome on the basis of medical center. What fraction of
the variation in FEV<sub>1</sub> levels is explained by the medical
center?

# Question 9

This is a pre-planned comparison, but the sample sizes differ across the
groups being compared. Obtain the results from a Tukey HSD method and
then a Bonferroni approach for pairwise comparisons of the population
FEV<sub>1</sub> means, in each case again using a 90% confidence level.
Do your conclusions differ?

## Hint for Question 9

Note that the `TukeyHSD` function takes a `conf.level` argument to
specify something other than the default 0.95. So, in fact, does the
Bonferroni approach using `pairwise.t.test`, although it’s not actually
necessary there, since that method only produces *p* values, not
confidence intervals.

## Grading

  - Question 1 is worth 25 points,
  - Questions 2, 3, 4, 8 and 9 are worth 10 points each,
  - Questions 5 and 6 are worth 5 points each
  - Question 7 is worth 15 points.

A complete rubric will be made available when grades are posted.
