431 Homework 6
================
Thomas E. Love
Due **2018-11-09** at noon. Version: 2018-10-25 23:09:35

# General Instructions

This homework includes seven questions. Be sure to respond to each
question.

## Hint

We expect you to make use of the `twobytwo` function, from the
`Love-boost.R` script on [our Data and Code
page](https://github.com/THOMASELOVE/431-2018-data). You should source
in that script as part of your Markdown file.

# Question 1 - The Signal and The Noise

Silver writes (in several places prior to Chapter 12, but especially
there) that the goal of any predictive model is to capture as much
signal as possible and as little noise as possible. What does this mean
to you in your scientific and other endeavours, going forward? Give a
specific example. An answer of 150 - 250 words is what weâ€™re looking
for.

# Question 2

Suppose you plan to study whether surgery can prolong life among men
suffering from prostate cancer, which typically develops and spreads
very slowly. Men diagnosed with prostate cancer will be randomly
assigned to either undergo surgery or not. Suppose you believe that
approximately 10% of men diagnosed with prostate cancer but do not have
surgery will eventually die from prostate cancer, and you want to do the
study using a sample size that will retain at least 80% power to detect
a drop down to 5%, using a two-sided approach with a 95% confidence
level.

What is the smallest number of men (including both the surgery and
non-surgery groups) that you will need to enroll in this new study to
meet these specifications, using a balanced design? Provide the details
of your calculation, and also provide a complete sentence or two
interpreting the meaning of the results in context.

# Question 3

In 2003, the *New England Journal of Medicine* published the results of
a Scandinavian study of the issue described in Question 2. In [that
report](http://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa012794), among 347 men
randomly assigned to surgery, 16 eventually died of prostate cancer,
compared with 31 of the 348 men who did not have surgery.

With 95% confidence, can you conclude that the odds of death due to
prostate cancer is significantly greater for those who did NOT have
surgery than it is for those who did have surgery? Provide appropriate
details of your calculations, including a sentence or two interpreting
the meaning of the results in context.

# Question 4

In a 2014 [follow-up
report](http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1311593#t=article)
describing results at the end of 2012, a total of 63 men assigned to
surgery and 99 men not assigned to surgery had died of prostate cancer.
In a sentence or two, explain how an analysis of these new results
compares to the conclusions you drew in Question 3.

# Setting up Questions 5-7

Kapitulnik et al. (1976) compared the metabolism of a drug,
zocazolamine, in placentas from 13 women who smoked during pregnancy and
11 who did not. The purpose of the study was to investigate the presence
of the drug as a possible proxy for the rate at which benzo\[a\]pyrene
(a by-product of cigarette smoke) is metabolized. The data in the
`zocazo.csv` file show the measurements of zocazolamine hydroxylase
production (nmol 3H2O formed / g per hour) for the 24 subjects.

## Question 5

Develop a 99% confidence interval for the difference in the true means
of zoxazolamine hydroxylase production in placentas from women who
smoked as compared to those who did not, assuming that the distributions
of production are approximately Normally distributed in each group.

## Question 6

Suppose that in a new study, we assume a minimum clinically important
effect 20% as large as was seen in the Kapitulnik study, and we assume a
standard deviation of 1.5. If each individual measurement costs $150 to
obtain, how much money will be required to do the study with 99%
confidence and 90% power?

## Question 7

Suppose our maximum allowable budget is $15,000 for the study. Comment
on whether we can still do the study described in the previous question
if we switched to a 95% confidence level.

## Grading

  - Question 1 is worth 25 points,
  - Questions 2 - 4 are worth 15 points each, and
  - Questions 5 - 7 are worth 10 points each.

A complete rubric will be made available when grades are posted.
