431 Homework 8
================
Thomas E. Love
Due **2018-11-30** at noon. Version: 2018-11-12 22:27:42

# General Instructions

This homework includes **six** questions. Be sure to respond to each
question.

# Question 1 (30 points)

Tell us about the most useful thing (an insight, example or key idea)
that you learned from reading Nate Silver’s *The Signal and the Noise*.
Be sure to specify **in detail** how this insight/example/idea connects
to your own life, or work. Specify at least one quote from the book that
discuss this issue, and explain the context. Be sure that when we finish
your essay we have a clear understanding of how reading this book has
changed the way you think about the thing you describe or things related
to it.

An appropriate response to this question will be at least 200 words
long. Try to keep it below 500 words.

# General Description of the Data for Questions 2-6

Low dietary intake or low plasma concentrations of retinol,
beta-carotene, or other carotenoids might be associated with increased
risk of developing certain types of cancer. However, relatively few
studies have investigated the determinants of plasma concentrations of
these micronutrients. A cross-sectional study was designed to
investigate the relationship between personal characteristics and
dietary factors, and plasma concentrations of beta-carotene. Study
subjects (\(n = 300\)) were patients who had an elective surgical
procedure during a three-year period to biopsy or remove a lesion of the
lung, colon, breast, skin, ovary or uterus that was found to be
non-cancerous.

|      Variable | Description                                                                |
| ------------: | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|     `subj_ID` | Subject identification code (S-1001 to S-1300)                             |
|         `age` | Subject’s age (in years)                                                   |
|         `sex` | Subject’s sex (M = male, F = female)                                       |
|     `smoking` | Smoking Status (Never, Former, or Current)                                 |
|         `bmi` | Body-Mass Index ( weight in kilograms / \[height in meters\]<sup>2</sup> ) |
|     `vitamin` | Vitamin Use (1 = Often, 2 = Sometimes, 3 = Never)                          |
|    `calories` | Number of Calories consumed (per day)                                      |
|         `fat` | Number of grams of fat consumed (per day)                                  |
|       `fiber` | Number of grams of fiber consumed (per day)                                |
|     `alcohol` | Number of alcoholic drinks consumed (per week)                             |
| `cholesterol` | Number of milligrams of cholesterol consumed (per day)                     |
|  `betaplasma` | Plasma beta-carotene (in ng\(/\)ml)                                        |

The `hw8_plasma` data set is available on our web site. It contains 300
observations. You will use a subset of 240 of those observations
(selected at random) to fit your models, and the remaining 60
observations (those for which `holdout` = 1) to validate your model
selection.

In questions 2-6, you will build and present a multiple regression model
for plasma retinol levels. I would do so like this:

``` r
library(tidyverse)

hw8_plasma <- read_csv("hw8_plasma.csv") %>%
    mutate_if(is.character, funs(as.factor(.))) %>%
    mutate(subj_ID = as.character(subj_ID))
```

Then use the following code to select a training sample from the data
set (to be used in questions 2-6) and a test sample (to be used in
question 7). Feel free to use `431` as your seed - that is what we’ll do
in the Answer Sketch.

``` r
set.seed(431008)
hw8_training <- hw8_plasma %>% sample_n(240)
hw8_test <- anti_join(hw8_plasma, hw8_training, 
                      by = "subj_ID")
```

# Question 2 (15 points)

Use the `hw8_training` data frame to plot the distribution of the
outcome of interest, which is `betaplasma`, and then plot the logarithm
of `betaplasma`. Specify which of the two distributions better matches
the desirable qualities of an outcome variable in a regression model.
Whichever choice you make as to which outcome (`betaplasma` or
`log(betaplasma)`) stick with it for the rest of this homework.

# Question 3 (10 points)

Use the `hw8_training` data frame to build a model for your outcome (as
decided in Question 2) using the following 4 predictors: `age`, `sex`,
`bmi`, and `fiber`. Call that model `model_04`.

Summarize `model_04` and write a sentence or two to evaluate it. Be sure
you describe the model’s R<sup>2</sup> value. Also, be sure to interpret
the model’s residual standard error, in context.

# Question 4 (10 points)

For your `model_04`, what is the estimated effect of being female,
rather than male, on your outcome, holding everything else (age, bmi and
fiber) constant. Provide and interpret a 95% confidence interval for
that effect on your outcome.

# Question 5 (15 points)

Now use the `hw8_training` data frame to build a new model for your
outcome (as decided in Question 2) using the following 10 predictors:
`age`, `sex`, `smoking`, `bmi`, `vitamin`, `calories`, `fat`, `fiber`,
`alcohol`, `cholesterol`. Call that model `model_10`.

Compare `model_10` to `model_04` in terms of adjusted R<sup>2</sup>, and
residual standard error. Which model performs better on these summaries,
in this training sample?

# Question 6 (20 points)

Use the code provided in the [Project Study 2
Demonstration](https://github.com/THOMASELOVE/431-2018-project/tree/master/demo_study2)
(section 14) to calculate and then compare the prediction errors made by
the two models (`model_10` and `model_04`) you have generated. You
should:

1.  Calculate the prediction errors in each case, then combine the
    results from the two models, following the code in section 14.1.
2.  Visualize the prediction errors in each model, using the code in
    section 14.2.
3.  Form the table comparing the model predictions, using the code in
    section 14.3. Compare the models in terms of MAPE, MSPE and maximum
    prediction error.

What conclusions do you draw about which model (`model_10` or
`model_04`) is preferable? Is this the same conclusion you drew in
Question 5?
