431 Homework 2
================
Thomas E. Love
Due **2018-09-14** at noon. Version: 2018-08-23 11:33:49

# General Instructions

This homework includes eleven questions. Be sure to respond to each of
them.

## A Template for Doing Homework 2

This assignment requires you to analyze some data, and prepare a report
in the form of an HTML file, using R Markdown. We have provided you with
a very useful R Markdown document template for this assignment called
`YOURNAME-hw2.Rmd` that you should use to complete the assignment. Note
that this template is **different** than the one we gave you for
Homework 1.

The `YOURNAME-hw2.Rmd` file is part of the [downloadable data and code
materials](https://github.com/THOMASELOVE/431-2018-data) for the course.
Just click on the green **Click or download** button and select Download
ZIP to get the files you’ll need, including the `YOURNAME-hw2.Rmd`
template, as part of a ZIP file. Unzip the file on your computer into a
directory you can find again, and you’ll be ready to go.

## The Data for Homework 2

The setup for this assignment involves the following R code, which is
already contained in the `YOURNAME-hw2.Rmd` file.

``` r
knitr::opts_chunk$set(comment=NA)
options(width = 70)

library(MASS); library(tidyverse)
## make sure these packages are loaded in R
```

The data come from the `faithful` data frame contained in the base
installation of R, specifically, within the `datasets` package. These
data describe the duration of an eruption for the Old Faithful geyser in
Wyoming’s Yellowstone National Park, as well as the waiting time until
the next eruption.

The commands below place the `faithful` data frame in a tibble called
`hw2`, then display the tibble. We encourage you to use this `hw2`
tibble to develop your answers to Questions 1-10.

    hw2 <- tbl_df(faithful)
    hw2

Use the command `?faithful` to see some additional details about these
data. The `hw2` tibble contains observations on two variables:

  - `eruptions` = eruption time in minutes
  - `waiting` = waiting time to next eruption, also in minutes

# Question 1

Plot a histogram or other summary plot which meaningfully describes the
distribution of the waiting times. Be sure it is very clearly labeled.

# Question 2

What appears to be a typical waiting time? Compare the mean, median and
80% trimmed mean (mean of the middle 80% of the observed waiting times.)

# Question 3

What is the inter-quartile range, and how does it compare to the
standard deviation?

# Question 4

Is the distribution multi-modal or unimodal? How do you know?

# Question 5

Is the distribution skewed (and if so, in which direction) or is it
essentially symmetric? How do you know?

# Question 6

Are there any unusual (outlier) values in the distribution, and if so,
what are they?

# Question 7

Would a model using the Normal distribution be an appropriate way to
summarize the waiting time data? Why or why not?

# Question 8

Plot a scatterplot of the waiting times (y-axis) vs. the eruption
durations (x-axis) and be sure your plot is very clearly labeled.
Describe your general impression of the plot: what sort of relationship
do you see?

# Question 9

What is the correlation of waiting time with eruption duration? How
would you interpret this result?

# Question 10

Would a linear model be an appropriate thing to use in attempting to
predict the waiting time given the most recent eruption duration, based
on these data? Why or why not? Add a simple least squares regression
line to the plot.

# Question 11

Investigate questions 8-10 again using the `geyser` data in the `MASS`
package, and compare your results to what you obtained originally, in an
appropriate way. Use the headings 11a, 11b and 11c for these three parts
as indicated in the `YOURNAME-hw2.Rmd` template.

Be sure to use the command `?MASS::geyser` to see some additional
details about these data, and to learn more about how they differ from
the data in our original data set.

**Hint**: There is at least one key difference between the variables
available in `geyser` and those which you dealt with in the `faithful`
data. For full credit, you must specify that difference (and describe
its impact) in your response.

The commands below will place the relevant data for these questions in
the `hw2extra` tibble.

    hw2extra <- tbl_df(MASS::geyser)
    hw2extra

# A Few Tips

1.  You are welcome to discuss Assignment 2 with Dr. Love, the teaching
    assistants or your colleagues, but your answer must be prepared by
    you alone.

2.  Get R and R Studio and all of the suggested R packages and data sets
    onto your computer, [following our installation
    instructions](https://github.com/THOMASELOVE/431-2018/tree/master/software).

3.  Place the `YOURNAME-hw2.Rmd` document in a new clean directory in
    your computer - you might call the directory something helpful like
    `431hw2`, for instance. Change the name of the file from
    `YOURNAME-hw2.Rmd` to include your actual name.

4.  Once everything is loaded, start R Studio, and immediately build a
    new Project by selecting File … New Project. Select to build the new
    project in an existing directory, and navigate to the directory you
    created in step 3. When the project has been built, you should see
    `431hw2` (or whatever name you gave) in the upper right of your R
    Studio screen.

5.  Use the Files menu to select and open your newly renamed version of
    the YOURNAME-hw2.Rmd file.

6.  Edit the R Markdown file at the top to include your actual name
    instead of YOURNAME in the title and author fields in the prelude.

7.  Click on the little down arrow next to the word Knit at the top left
    of the screen and run the Markdown file to see if it generates a
    result. Select HTML as the result. Take a look at the result and see
    if it looks like it’s working.

8.  Return to R Studio and complete the assignment by editing the R
    Markdown file to include sentences in English and code chunks.

9.  Save your work, frequently, and re-knit it occasionally to see that
    changes you’ve made are working.

10. Don’t be afraid to ask questions, either of Professor Love, or of
    the teaching assistants, either in person at office hours or
    before/after class, or email **431-help at case dot edu**.

## Grading Rubric

Homework 2 will be graded on a 0-100 scale. You will receive some credit
for making a reasonable effort to build a good response to each
question, and then additional credit if your response is (essentially)
correct, your code is clean and you’ve written any text using complete
English sentences.
